---
layout: post
title: gender by default
description: discussion of the idea of 'gender by default', in relation to my experience with gender
categories: trans
---

In trans/nonbinary/LGBT/etc circles, sometimes you see the concept of "cis by default", where
someone considers themselves cisgender because they don't experience gender dysphoria and haven't
had the chance (or the desire) to explore a different gender identity. You can see this kind of
outlook when you ask someone "if you were to wake up tomorrow as a cis woman/cis man, how would you
feel?" If an ostensibly cis person responds with something like "i'd probably be fine with it",
they're probably "cis by default" instead of "strongly cis".

I like this concept because i feel like it described my life for the first 22-ish years. Even for a
while after it, i didn't do much because i wasn't sure that i was "trans enough" to warrant going
through the process of transition. (Also because i was living in my home town at the time, and i was
really uncertain about the resources or level of support i would have from my communities. I'm
thankful that a lot of the people from my "old life" have turned out to be supportive.)

(Also also, "i'm not trans enough to transition" was admittedly a bad excuse; anyone else who
considers themselves in a similar position right now should try to dive into what is really causing
them to hesitate - for me it was a reaction to seeing a poor picture of what trans bodies in
transition look and act like, and once i had met more trans people online i was much more willing to
go through the process myself.)

Even now, when i've almost fully changed my gender expression and try to present at least somewhat
femme full-time, i'm not sure i feel all that much differently about it. To be sure, i'm happy to
have been able to transition, and i do believe i would have liked the ability to do it even earlier
in life. It just hasn't been a transformative experience for me the same way that other trans people
say it is for them. The reason is that the "cis by default" mentality is similar to the experience
of being agender, which i feel is a term that describes my experience more often than not.

I've spent the last few years trying to modify my gender expression, using the model of being "a
trans woman" to try and guide that journey. Over time, though, especially after i've been on HRT and
changed my wardrobe and the like, i've found that even when being femme enough to pass, i don't feel
100% "at home" in my chosen gender expression, *or* in my assigned one. Don't take this to mean i
regret transitioning! There are still things i like about being a woman, and specifically a trans
woman. But if i were to pick a more accurate gender term for myself, it would be some combination of
"trans agender" or "nonbinary trans woman" or (if you're familiar with the term) "demigirl". (Or, if
you're familiar with the meme, "none gender with left girl".)

But since that degree of specificity isn't really that helpful in common conversation, i can stick
with portraying myself as a trans woman and leaving the more precise semantics for blog posts like
this.

Anyway, that's why my pronouns are listed as "she/they". I like to say that i tend to use "they" for
myself and prefer "she" from others. I think i might take the "they" off at some point in the
future, but for now i have it there as a signal of the stuff i talked about in this post.
